I'm not supposed to play favorites with
what I'm teaching you, but this is one of
my favorite new tricks that I'd like to
demonstrate for you here inside CodePen.
So, we're looking at number 11.
We're in chapter 11.
This is the beginning state, and
we're looking at figures and
figure captions again.
When we were working in Flexbox,
I walked you through the process of
overlapping a caption onto a figure
using absolute and relative positioning.
And that is a wonderful
way of doing things.
It's been around for, gosh,
15 years now that you've been able to do
something like that, although not
necessarily the figure tag, but
the concept has been around for
a very long time.
One of the really interesting things
that grid does that Flexbox does not do,
is grid allows your cells to overlap.
So, by leveraging grid inside of your
figures and your figure captions,
you can overlay your figure captions
very nicely over your figures here
without even having to use absolute and
relative positioning.
So, let's take a look at how exactly
that would look here in this particular
example.
So, what I've got inside of,
I have a div with a class of row around
all of these particular figures.
Inside of that, I have four different
figures, they have different content, but
they all have the same markup.
So, the way the markup goes,
we have a figure, we have an image, and
then we have our figure caption.
In the figure caption, and
it has an h2 and a paragraph inside of it.
So, where are our children,
and where are our parents?
We've actually got two sets going on here.
So, first of all, to create this set of
four cells here laid out in the following
way, that's actually if you scroll down
in the CSS I've already given you,
I have a media query here set up for
600 pixels and higher.
And this is set up with display grid,
grid-template columns of 1fr,
1fr, and a gap of 2%.
So, that is our first round of layout.
That just gives us very nice layout of
those four cells there on the page.
Now we're going to do
a second set of layouts.
This is going to be
within the figure itself.
So, where are the parents and
children here inside of our figure?
We have a figure and it has two children,
an image and a figure caption.
So, what do we need to do?
If you plan in advance,
what we want to have happen is,
we wanna have our image and
our figure caption.
We wanna have the figure caption,
overlap that image at least somewhat.
So, our figure is going to wind up
being our grid container or our parent,
the image and the figure caption
are our grid items or the children, and
we're going to somehow make these
two things overlap using CSS grid.
So, let's write that code,
now that I've explained to you the thought
process behind what we're doing.
So, I've got several declarations here
of figure captions and figures and
all the rest of it.
I am just going to hit return
a whole bunch of times,
just to keep things straightforward
as to what I'm adding here.
In the real world you would probably
combine all of these into single
declarations.
But for now, for
learning purposes let's do it this way.
So, I'm gonna start with figure, And
I'm going to set it up to display grid,
And I'm
going to have a single column, actually,
the layout is here exactly as I want it.
I want everything to be in one column,
but I'm going to declare that column.
So, grid hyphen template, hyphen columns,
and we can just set that
up to be again 1fr.
The actual width of this
column doesn't really matter,
just take up the full space.
So, 1fr is just fine.
And I'm gonna set it up interestingly,
with three rows.
So, grid-template-rows of repeat,
3 comma auto.
So, I wanna have three rows, you figure
out how tall each of those rows are.
Why three rows?
Because we're gonna start with
in our initial three rows,
what good we'll do is say,
okay, I have an image.
That goes in row one.
I have a figure caption,
that goes in row two.
And I do have a third row,
but it's currently empty.
You don't necessarily see
that displayed on the screen,
grid knows that it exists because we
have declared that it exists, but
it's not populated with anything at
this particular moment in time, okay.
So, now what I wanna do is, I'm going to
set up my image and my figure caption.
So for my image,
I'll set this up to have a grid,
hyphen, column, 1 slash 2.
In other words, I want it to occupy
the only column that we have and
it goes from 1 to 2.
And I'm very specific about that.
It will actually apply to
all of these items here,
because this is some very generic code.
And we're talking about an individual
grid system in each one of these figures.
So, it's actually going to apply
to all of these individually.
And then, we're going to have a grid,
hyphen row of 1 slash 3.
So, my image is going to span
across the first two rows.
So I have, remember,
I declared three rows.
The image is gonna occupy rows 1 and 2.
Now, the figure caption is
occupying row number 3.
You won't actually see
a change here on the screen,
but that change happened behind
the scenes inside of grid.
For my figure caption, I'll say again,
my grid, hyphen column will be 1 slash 2.
Because I want it to take up
the same number of columns as well,
but then my grid row will be 2 slash 3.
So now, my figure caption goes
up over the top of the image.
See how nicely that's overlapping here?
And that is because my images taking up 1
to 3, and my caption is taking up 2 to 3.
So, now it looks this particular way.
You can tweak this further by
indicating how high you want
the figure caption to be.
You could put that right on up here and
your grid-template-rows.
You could have them be auto and then,
a very specific height for the caption.
If you wanted to do it that way, you could
leave it the way I have left it, which is,
this is fine.
Just set it up that way, whatever you want
it to do at that point in time to tweak
that a little bit further.
But this is a technique
that is really fantastic.
We don't have to worry about absolute or
relative positioning.
We don't have to worry
about other absolutely or
relatively positioned
elements on the page.
It's very, very straightforward.
This is probably the best
way of having your image and
your figure caption overlapping each other
very nicely inside of this type of system.
The big difference between
this methodology and
something with absolute
relative positioning is this.
Absolute and relative positioning,
we could have pretty much
any element down our tree.
And we could take an element
that's way down in our HTML, and
position it relative to something
that's way outside of our tree.
Here, where we're working with grid,
the two elements or
however many elements you have,
have to be siblings.
So, here in the HTML this works because
we have image and we have figure caption.
They are next to each other in space
surrounded by the same rapper.
So the effect that I have here
is going to be somewhat limited.
It's not as flexible necessarily as
absolute and relative positioning.
It's not a complete takeover of that, but
it is a great way of doing things
if you have this type of markup.
Okay, yes Mark.
>> Why choose three rows instead of two?
>> Why choose three rows instead of two,
because most likely you don't want your
figure caption occupying half
of the height of that image.
So, if you had two rows, that may be
what you wind up with as default.
You could of course, do it that way and
then specify that your second
row has a shorter height.
For example, you could say,
maybe that row was taking up whatever,
a third of the height or
a quarter of the height and
let the other row take up
the remaining part of it.
That would work fine too.
But as you see here, the number of rows
overall doesn't really matter if there is
a row with nothing in it,
grid isn't even displaying it.
So, whatever works for
you is probably just fine.
>> This is cool.
>> It is very cool, isn't it?
Yeah.
As I said,
one of the really powerful features of
grid is the ability to overlap cells.
And a lot of people aren't taking
advantage of this yet, but
this is a great case for doing that.